Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Dr.
Carlos Lueza Fox. He's director of the National, the
Natural Science Museum in Barcelona, and today we're going
to talk about his latest book, Identity, What DNA
Can Tell Us About Ourselves. So, Dr. Lweza Fox,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to talk with you.
Yeah, it's a pleasure also, for me to be
here with you.
OK, so, uh, let me ask you first, uh,
what is identity from the perspective of genetics, because,
of course, I mean in other sciences and other
domains of knowledge like, I don't know, psychology, philosophy,
and so on, perhaps people would have a particular
understanding of what identity is, but from the perspective
of genetics, how do you approach it?
Um, YEAH, yeah, you're right. I would say that,
uh, identity is usually, um, considered a set of
traits that defines, uh, your own, uh, sense of
belonging either as individual or as a member of
a collective. And these traits can be, you know,
a mixture of several things like social traits, and,
you know, you can be rich and you can
belong to the, to the rich community in your
country or whenever you can speak a particular language,
you can have a particular religion. So it's a
set of Um, you know, some, some traits which
are, um, cultural, but then, um, some of the
traits that define identity in this broad sense, uh,
at the same time, kind of, uh, um, difficult
to define are root in perceptions of geography and,
uh, place, let's say, no, so you have a
particular identity because you belong to a group that
has been In that, mm, you know, uh, particular
place of the Earth during hundreds, some would say
thousands of years, um, and, and this is something
that clearly can have, um, a root in genetics
and can be tested from genetics. And so the
whole idea, although, you know, I would say genetics,
um, Uh, has never been, um, concerned about defining
identity in humans. It's clear to me that some
of the traits that define, uh, identity can have
this temporal dimension then that can be now explored
from genetics, especially because we are. In a very
special situation where we are able to retrieve genomes,
thousands of genomes from the past, we are able
to model pedigrees in millions of people, something that
computationally was impossible to do just some years ago.
And also we have this enormous forensics and ancestry
databases. So the combination of all these. Uh, DEVELOPMENTS,
which are some of them very recent, less than
10 years ago, is what, um, makes the possibility
of linking, uh, notions of identity with genetics for
the first time, I would say.
But I mean when we talk about identity, are
there different levels of identity, or are we simply
focusing, for example, on individual identity, or can we
through genetics also talk about some other forms of
collective identity, for example?
Yes, uh, yeah, you are right. I think there
are several levels and layers of identity, uh, in,
in any situation, just talking about uh what I
mentioned before, social, cultural identity, etc. uh, WE have
this perception of ourselves as single individuals. Uh, BUT
then at the same time, uh, we have this
perception of, um, you know, uh, where do we
belong, uh, beyond being single individuals, uh, because we
are inserted in a social context, so, uh, we
need to feel that. You know, we belong to
a particular family, extended family, group, clan, nation, state,
whenever. So there are kind of different levels of
identity. The basic one is, I am myself and
I am a person different from the rest of
the persons. We'll see also that this is something
that it has been debated also, uh, especially in
cases where we have like uh copies around. Uh,
BUT then there are collective level, um, of identity
and some of these, uh, these, uh, higher levels
can also be explored from genetics. So, uh, genetics
can explore the individual level, uh, because we can
have our genome sequenced and compared to genomes from
other people either around us or from distant places.
Um, BUT also genetics can have an, an, you
know, an overview of the diversity within the collective
identity we, uh, we belong, we belong to. So,
identity has this kind of a strange perception, um,
where it's not only important that we decide who
we are, but also What happens with the rest
of the people? How do they see us? I
mean, they see us as a member of, of,
of them like belonging to, um, to themselves or
someone different, so, yeah.
But I mean when it comes to the different
kinds of social identities that we might have, uh,
do they have a correspondence at the level of
genetics, because for example, we might have an uh
family identity, we might have a community identity, we
might have a national identity. And then there's also
social categories like for example ethnicity. We also use
concepts like race socially and we'll probably come back
to race specifically later, but I mean I I
just wanted to understand whether we should treat all
social identities that. Use as having some basis in
genetics or if at least some of them we
sim we we should simply treat as being social
identities as having a reality but simply in the
realm of sociology, for example, and not so much
in the realm of genetics or biology.
No, no, it's, uh, yeah, it's obviously it's a
very complex, uh, uh, interplay, and, and some of
them are quite I would say closely linked to
genetics. I would, I was thinking in the family
level, but not, not even in the family level
because for instance, you know, I have an aunt
and I have an uncle, uh, but, uh, the
only one who is, uh, my close family is
my aunt because my uncle, you know, is the
husband of my, uh, aunt, so they are family,
uh, in a level that everyone will consider family
like, uh, associated to kinship and, and, and. Uh,
GENETICS, but, uh, you know, some of my family,
uh, members are not even, uh, biologically linked to
me, although they clearly influence me as a person,
let's say, no. Uh, AND as we go to
upper levels, then we will find, um, um, you
know, a complex situation where you can belong to
a community. Let's think, for instance, uh, you belong
to a football club. Life happens, uh, here in
Spain, which is sometimes more important than family, uh,
and, uh, as far as you belong to that
particular, uh, football club or whatever club, uh, you
are a member of that community and, you know,
it doesn't really mean anything about genetics, but then
there are some levels like, uh, some social levels,
uh, in, uh, you know, in some Let's say,
um, um, the small societies where clearly there is
a very close relationship between, between being a member
of that society and having a kind of, um,
biological relationship, and then also we can, we can
talk about higher levels like, uh, nation states. Most
of the nation states in uh Europe and some
in, in, in Americas. They were formed in the
last hundreds of years. So, uh, clearly being a
member of that particular nation state, it means that
you will have some probably links, uh, geographical links
in that, in that, uh, place, uh, and therefore
this can be also explored from genetics. So, I,
I, uh, and also, yeah, in the, in the
higher level. Uh, BEING a member of a particular
continent, um, I don't know, broad geographical areas, being
European, uh, what does it mean to be European?
It's, uh, nobody will, will know how to answer
that, but clearly it can have a kind of
a genetic expression also. Uh, AND finally, being a
member of our species is also a bit unclear
now because we have Um, uh, we have inherited,
uh, genes from Denisovans and from Neanderthals. Uh, SO
there is, uh, there is clearly a relationship that
can be explored on many different levels, but this
relationship is complex and needs to be understood.
But how much genetic variation and even genetic similarity
do we find across humans? So for example, if
I were to pick a random person from Europe.
And a random person from Africa or from Asia
or from uh South America, I, I mean, how
much variation and similarity would I expect to find
between them?
Yeah, that's a very complex question also. Um, FIRST
of all, variation, genetic variation is something. That is
relatives and it, um, I would say that it
needs to be compared. 11 good exercise is compare
diversity to other species, maybe primate species themselves, um,
because of course it can, well, you know, you
know that the situation, it will never be like
we are all clones on or that we are
all different in all possible nucleotide positions of our
genome that would be like, uh, you know, two
extremes, and but this is never going to happen.
Uh, AND then when the first, I would say
the first approach is to look at diversity, uh,
as, um, uh, um, you know, as compared to
other, uh, close, uh, species, and then when we
look at that, we discover that in, in the
level of primates, we are quite uh uh not
really diverse species. So we can, there are several
ways of measuring this like differences in variable positions
across all our genomes, and sequencing, you know, a
set of individuals for each species and then obtaining,
you know, statistics and comparing them. When we do
that. We discover we are a, um, a very,
uh, uh, species with a very low diversity and
we look at the, uh, at the mammals level,
then we also are in the bottom, uh, uh,
low, low bottom level of uh diversity. Uh, PRIMATE
species that even less diverse than us are species
which are extremely endangered like, uh, mountain gorillas or
something like that. So first of all, we are
a a species which has a very low diversity,
probably because we are a very recent species, something
that uh emerged uh maybe 30 300,000 years ago
in Africa, then underwent several bottlenecks, lost diversity in
all the way, uh, um, and therefore, We, we
are not especially variable, let's say, but then we
can make other exercises like thinking, OK, um, let's
look at the genomes of modern people, how many
variable positions are described. For instance, I think in
Europeans now with hundreds of thousands of genomes sequenced,
I think we have something like 3 million positions
which can have variation, blah blah. Um, BUT then
when we look at this position, they are never
really structured in, in, in, in a geographical, uh,
level, uh, and most of the variation is spread
across different human populations. So there is what we
call common variants. Common variant is, is a variant,
a genetic variant which is present in more than
5% of the individuals of a single species, let's
say. Uh, AND when we look at all the
variation, we discovered that, that many positions in our
genome don't have this variation and when they have
this variation, they are common variants which are present
in, you know, Africans, uh, Europeans, etc. Uh, AFTER
this, we can, you know, we can continue, um,
exploring diversity and then what we found always in
all genetic studies is that Africa has The highest
genetic variation in our species, Africa, and then, you
know, the people living in different African populations to
the point that the rest of the world is
just a sub sample of all the variation within
Africa and this, uh, you know, is not an
exaggeration that you can pick up two random individuals
in sub-Saharan Africa and they will have They will
be more diverse, more different genetically than picking up
a European and an individual from Papua New Guinea,
for instance. I know this sounds surprising, but really
this is the situation. Uh, YEP.
Yeah, that's really fascinating. So when it comes to
ancestry and genetic tests, because those are becoming more
popular in recent years, and I really wanted to
understand because, for example, let's say I've never done
one of those tests, but let's say that I
did and It came back with a result like
I don't know that I was 2% Jew, uh,
12% Macedonian, uh, 25% Portuguese, and so on and
so forth. I mean, what does that information really
tell us because, um, are there really Or should
we really think about genes as being part of
a particular nationality or a particular ethnicity or even
a particular uh religion or a particular race? Uh,
I mean, does that make sense to think, uh,
to think about genes in those terms?
No, I don't think so. I mean, but, but,
but, but then consider the outcome and the interpretation,
the personal interpretation of these results is something that
depends on each person, uh, and there are, there
are some studies that apparently the people, um, is
like prepared to accept some results, but they discard
others that they don't like, let's say, so. So,
uh, there is always a subjective interpretation depending on
what you would like to be, what you would
like to hear, which is very much when, when
if you ask, uh, the opinion about yourself to
other people, you, you just filter, you, you want
to hear some things, but you discard it, the
things you don't want to hear. So this is
a similar situation, uh, but then what happens is
that there are many of these ancestry companies. Uh,
AND they are quite opaque, let's say, on how
do they analyze, how do they obtain the results,
how they interpret
in terms of their, in terms of their methodology.
Yes, it's, uh, in fact, it's undisclosed, uh, and
I am the kind of person that keeps receiving,
I don't know, I would say several times a
week. Uh, RESULTS from customers, you know, asking me
if I can interpret for them what the companies
have said, you know, because sometimes they, they told
them, you know, I am, uh, 10% Viking, uh,
and, uh, 5% Scythian, uh, or uh 50% uh
Imperial Roman or something like that. Uh, BUT this
depends a lot on the companies. Some are, let's
say, trying to, you know, to, to, to give
this kind of misleading information, and, and others are,
let's say, more accurate, um, but at the end
it depends on how do you, uh, work, how
do you model the data. And also it depends
a lot on how many customers do you have
and where do they come from, because at the
end, these companies, of course, they use their own
data. So if they have, let's say imagine you,
they have 2 million customers, but only a small
fraction of them come from Africa, which is an
incredibly diverse continent. It's very difficult. They could really
uh sort out uh meaningful things about, you know,
your, your fraction of African, uh, African genome. So,
uh, that's a very interesting, it's a very interesting
part. I would say that many, many people have
this test done. I myself, I did one on,
on my own ancestry many years ago, one of
the most, uh, I would say powerful companies. Um,
AND of course you can just laugh, you know,
uh, in English, uh, person, uh, I have a
section where I say that, uh, I always, uh,
like this section. I have a significant percent of
French, German, which is, uh, funny to put together
these two countries that have been, you know, invading
one another for, uh, for many centuries, um. But
at this, at the same time, it's a very
powerful tool for identity and some people really think
uh this is uh opens new horizons in their
lives and they can see themselves under a different
light, but so there, therefore, it's a, it's a
kind of a, an important tool. Uh, SOME people,
I don't know, uh, I know some people got,
uh, Jewish ancestry, significant percent, so they have converted
to Judaism, they have, uh, you know, traveled to
Israel or whatever, so it's not just a joke,
it's something that can have a very profound impact
in people who are seeking for. Uh, FOR, uh,
uh, signals of, uh, of identity at the end,
neither a collective or, or individual, and, and it,
it, uh, and also it can be relevant for
communities that have been, um, uh, let's say socially
marginalized like, uh, black Americans that were, you know,
the slaves, millions of slaves in North America where
there are no, uh, records. Uh, WHATSOEVER. So it's
very difficult. You can reconstruct your genealogical tree like
we do in, uh, Europe because they were just,
uh, you know, uh, destroyed or never taken into
account. Um, SO at least these companies, they offer
the possibility of having an idea of their ancestry.
And therefore it's associated to um reparation and, you
know, and, and, and social understanding of uh of
of who you are. So, um I, I, I
think it would be, uh, is, is, is, is
a kind of a complicated subject uh for them
to deal with that, with that information.
Mhm. Uh, I wanted to ask you, uh, also
about, uh, twins, uh, uh, identical twins primarily, but
also if you want, we can talk about fraternal
twins, but because, um, we have, uh, studies done
with, uh, twins, uh, I mean in medicine, for
example, in behavioral genetics and so on. But, uh,
and people, when they study twins, I mean, if
they're studying identical twins, they assume that they share
100% of their genome, and if they're studying fraternal
twins, they assume that they share around 50% of
their genome. But is that really always the case
that even identical twins necessarily share 100% of their
genes?
Yeah, so it's, it's not the case, although this
is a very recent information. Nobody has, yeah, I
would say, uh, you know, paid attention to that
until very recently with the genomic techniques that allow
you to sequence hundreds of people, let's say. Um,
THE study of twins is a very classical approach
to trying to sort out, um, which traits are
inherited and which are associated to, um, purely environment,
and, uh, it's a very clever idea if you
think on that. The idea is that the identical
twins are going to share 100% of the genome.
Uh, AND, uh, fraternal twins, uh, twins are like,
uh, brothers or brothers and sisters, but born in
the same moment, uh, so they will share 50%.
So any trait that you find overexpressed in identical
twins as compared to fraternal ones. Then they will
inform you on the, on the potential um genetic
basis of any trait you can imagine, including, I
don't know, perception of religion or things like that.
Um, uh, THIS has been going on for uh
decades, but then sometimes, you know, what is difficult
to discern is the identical twin, twins also. They
tend to share also an identical environment, uh, you
know, the, the parents sometimes dress them, you know,
with the same clothes, the same colors, and the
same hairdresses, and they go to the same school,
the same class, etc. Uh, SO this, uh, it,
it conflates a bit the identical environment, I would
say. Um, PROBABLY most of these studies, uh, still
will have a problem discerning exactly the genetic basis
and the environmental basis, which is maybe, maybe fifty-fifty
in many, in many of the traits. But then,
uh, the reason I, uh, the recent studies, the,
what, what they did is just to sequence the
complete genomes of all these, uh, couples or these
twins. And they found they are almost never totally
identical. In some cases, identical twins, they have something
like 20 mutations and differences, which are difference of
um arose at the very early stages of the
embryonic development. I think on average it's 5.something, so
it's more likely that uh to find twins, identical
twins that are different in some mutations and these
mutations, of course they can, can have a role
in a, in a number of traits and it's
very, very difficult to find identical twins which are
identical genetically. Uh, SO this is also an interesting
information. Now, of course, many of these genes maybe
they don't have, uh, much importance, uh, but the
idea, I would say is that identical twins are
maybe not as identical as we, we, we thought.
So with that being the case, how do you
think we should approach studies done on identical twins
and fraternal twins as well? I mean, when it
comes to the conclusions we can derive from them,
I mean, how careful should we be?
Yeah, I am not a big fan of many
of these studies, uh, which are, they have problems
of replication, uh, low sample sizes, difficult methodologies. Um,
I would say this is kind of a A
gray, um, area, you know, this is something that
then especially in behavioral genetics, um, which of course
is the more, the most controversial probably approach to
these studies, trying to understand things such as, I
don't know, um, sexual identity or things like that,
uh, studying maybe 40 couples, um. Uh, AND then,
uh, after some years, I discovered that there were
many methodological pitfalls, etc. Um, SO it's a, it's
a complex, um, it's a complex way to study,
and at the end, I, I'm not sure if
this is really constructive, let's say, having, you know,
knowing that maybe 50%. Of your Uh trend that
your tendency towards I don't know, towards, um, liking
a particular food or something like that, or having
a particular behavior or habit for smoking whenever. 50%
is maybe due to your genes, 50% is maybe
due to your environment, um. IS associated to identity
again, but it's, uh, as in many aspects of
my book, it's unclear, uh, if this is a
really a constructive information.
Mhm. Right. And how about uh people who are
lookalikes? I mean, because sometimes, particularly when it's, when
it involves famous people, because, I mean, many people
or most people know them and then uh someone
appears that uh people find out that there's someone
out there. Who is very, very similar in terms
of their appearance, sometimes facial traits, other times even
some other, uh, anatomical traits to the, to the
other person. Uh, I mean, uh, does that have
a genetic basis? Do lookalikes share some genes or
not?
Yeah, this, this, uh, of course, that, that it
is, uh, in literature, uh, is, it has been,
uh, something that has been explored for, uh, hundreds
of years, I would say, you know, there are,
uh, Edgar Allan Poe has this William Wilson, uh,
tale where, uh, you know, this, the, the character
has, you know, someone who even has the same
name, and it looks very much like him. Uh,
HE'S harassing him, uh, for, for years while he's
trying to destroy himself and say, uh, the Fyodor
Do Dovstoyevsky also has, um, uh, tail, uh, which
is the the double, uh, and it's never clear
if the, the rest of the people, they see
the, you know, the similarities, and, you know, it's
unclear if it's just a particular obsession. Um, SO
the, the idea of doppelgangers, this idea of a
double that, you know, exists, a double of you,
usually is a double that has a different moral
meaning, you know, usually, uh, it's a bad omen,
but sometimes in like in the case of William
Wilson, the double is, uh, is virtuous, and it's
you, the narrator who is, you know, the, um,
going into the, into the, into a downfall. Um,
BUT now in the 21st century with the social
media, this has exploded. I mean, it's uh lots
of, it's kind of, kind of funny. I mean,
some of them are really, uh, striking people who
finds in the internet uh double of himself or
herself. Um, AND you can even play that in
the past, uh, and I, I remember I, I
was, uh, I saw some images of, uh, I
think, I don't know, uh, uh, Nicolas Cage, uh,
during the, the, the North American Civil War, someone
who looks exactly like him, but, you know, dressed
as a Confederate soldier, um, and of course. As
usually in, in science, but you know, um, uh,
legitimate question is, well, why do the people, the
people can look alike. Do the, does it mean
they are family related? Does it mean they came
from the same geographical area? Does it mean they,
they have, they share some genes, I would say
genes associated to facial morphology, of course. Uh, AND
I was involved, involved in, in the first study
on lookalikes, uh, a couple of years ago, uh,
where we, we took advantage of one of these
photographers that was making couples around the world, and
we asked some of these couples if they wanted
to, um, you know, to get analyze their genomes
and compare and see what happened. And we uh
with, um, um, with some of these couples, uh,
and then we, we explore several levels of, um,
um, similarities. The first one obvious is, uh, are
they family related? Maybe they are, you know, second
cousins or third cousins. I, they don't know. This
was not the case. They never, they were never
family related. Uh, YOU can, you can, you can
look at the internet. Some of these, they, they
really look alike. I, I, some of, some people
have beards and maybe they look more similar, but
some people are really very, very similar, strikingly similar.
Uh, um, WHEN we look at the ancestry, they
tend to come from similar geographical region, which it
makes sense. Uh, I remember one case, however, where
one of the individuals was from Germany and the
other one from southern Italy. They look exactly the
same, um, and then, uh, of course what we
did is look at the rest of the genome,
one discarded they were not, you know, they were
not really, not family related. Uh, AND then we
found they were, they were sharing kind of hundreds
of variants which are described associated to facial morphology
which makes sense and interestingly, uh, most of them
were sharing also. Uh, MUTATIONS in genes that have
been described associated to kind of dietary habits or,
you know, smoking behavior or things like that beyond
just the morphology. So that's a very interesting idea.
I think that you are. Similar to someone else,
not just because the structure of your face, which,
you know, it depends on a lot of genes,
but at the end it's a finite number of
genes, and we have like, uh, you know, 8
billion people in the world. So clearly all of
us, they, they are, we are going to have
a double somewhere. Uh, BUT also because some of
the genes are probably associated to dietary habits that
also shape our personality and our, um, you know,
our, our look at the end.
Mhm. So, I, I would like to ask you
about a topic that, uh, very unfortunately nowadays is
extremely politicized, uh, I mean, for several different reasons,
but, uh, when it comes to sex, the Determination,
I mean, in what ways do the sexes differ
genetically and how is sex determined when it comes
to development, intrauterine development?
Yes, I mean, uh, the sex determination, as, uh,
you know, operates at different levels, and, uh, in
any of these debates, what is important is not
conflating these different levels because then it becomes a
mess, and I think it's what's happening. I would
say almost any biologist would agree there are two
biological sexes, uh, one that, uh, you know, based
on the gamuts they produce, one produces mobile, small
gamets. The sperm and the other one produce uh
big um um immobile gametes which are the, the
eggs, uh, and of course this production, this structure,
it has um a genetic base, a genetic structure.
But also this, uh, once you have this genetic
structure, this has to go to upper levels to
end up in the physiological level, and these upper
levels, um, involve uh hormone productions and hormones involves
interaction between, uh, hormones, uh, physiological development. And at
the end, at the very top level, then there
is, you know, maybe a psychological also association and,
or the social perception of uh these, uh, two
different biological sexes. As, you know, you go to
the upper levels and the social levels, of course,
uh, where we can talk about gender, uh, then
it's when it becomes more, uh, messy, let's say.
But also at the basic chromosomal levels, many things
can happen, of course, uh, because, um, for the
um development of these uh biological sex, you have
uh genes that that generate a specific hormone that
then develops, uh, you know, into testes and the
other one into ovarians, and then maybe there is
a deletion of that particular gene, so you can,
I don't know. You can be, for instance, um,
um, XXX, so instead of being, uh, you know,
um, like a biological female, you have a, you
know, maybe the gene that is in the Y
chromosome and you have inserted in the X chromosome,
so you can have Uh, like, uh, male, uh,
traits, uh, being chromosomically, uh, female, etc. There are
many of, many of these, uh, complications, let's say,
but it doesn't mean that there are many, many
different sexes, and it means there are two biological
sexes still. VERY much the same way that we,
you know, we have a Down syndrome and people
have uh 3 copies of the 21 chromosome, but
the, the general plan of our species is 23,
uh, you know, couples, so 46 chromosomes. Uh, SO
that's, that really does not invalidate the general rule,
but of course, it complicates things, as I say,
especially. When you go to gender, gender, I would
say is the social manifestation of these biological sexes
where people, um, they, people, they don't, some people
don't think, feel comfortable, uh, with the social rules,
uh, where you, you are, uh, let's say, placed
because of your biological sex, which is absolutely legitimate.
But in these debates, they usually what what happens
is that people conflate the biological reality with the
social reality, which is of course uh um uh
creates confusion.
Yes, and it's very important, I guess here to
mention that or to emphasize that the genetics of
sexual, uh, of sex determination and sexual development does
not invalidate the reality of gender, right, because some
people pick up on the. Genetics or the biology,
the, the phenotypic traits in terms of primary sexual
characteristics, for example, to say that, uh, I mean,
there's only uh sex and it's only sex that
matters, but that's not really the case, right?
No, really, I understand perfectly. Some people can feel.
Uh, YOU know, this basic representation of being just,
um, biological male or bio biological female, not, not
to mention these intersex, uh, let's say, um, specific
cases, uh, does not really in terms of identity
represents themselves. Um, SO, uh, uh, I, I, I,
um, but, but not only in this case, I
would say that in the case of Um, uh,
census and race attribution, for instance, something that happens
in the states where you have to define yourself,
where which race do you belong or which ethnic
group do you belong. I, I perfectly understand that
some people feel uncomfortable being defined in such a
narrow sense, and this happens in, uh, absolutely the
same. In the same way, way, I'm only saying
that conflating all these terms at the end, it
creates uh confusion, uh but also invalidates at the
end the use of uh scientific parameters, so it
is like render them, uh, absolutely, um, and you
know, uh, uh, in an, in, uh, useless for
any scientific, uh, approach which I think is unfair
also. Otherwise we cannot understand evolution in, in our,
uh, in life if we don't understand there are
two basic biological sexes.
Right. Um, WHEN, uh, in the book you also
talk about the genetics of, uh, kinship. Uh, I
mean, from the, from a genetics perspective, uh, what
is, uh, family
exactly? Yes, well, as I mentioned, a family is,
let's say is, uh, you, you can consider a
family, the, your, um, genealogical relatives. Um, ALTHOUGH I,
you know, I mentioned at the beginning, not all
your family members are genetically related, but let's, let's
focus on the, on the basic genealogy where you
have 2 parents, 4 grandparents, 8 great-grandparents. Etc. So
this is something that so far it has been
explored from genealogy looking at uh records, let's say
at at a certain level it it becomes very
difficult because the information is missing, etc. So after
several generations, you, you could, you know, double the
number of your ancestors, but it's very difficult to
get the information and in some cases in Europe,
you maybe can go like 500, 600 years ago.
Uh, SOMETIMES in the royal families, you can even
go, you know, close to 1000 years ago. Um,
THE, this is genealogy and this is something many
people consider. VERY important for their identity perception because
you are root in a particular family, you know
your ancestors, you research about them, you know, you
became identified with them when they were heroes in
the First World War or they were traitors and
who were killed. Somewhere. So there is, there is
this, uh, this, um, different perception and it has
been studied. Some people distressed to, uh, to discover,
you know, some of their ancestors. Some people feel
proud, etc. Uh, WHAT happens now is that we
are in, in, in a, in a situation where,
first of all, we can Explore genetically these ancestors
well beyond any genealogical record and very soon we'll
have ancestors which will be real genetic ancestors that
will be placed in the Middle Ages, of course,
beyond any possible, uh, any possible information from any
church or whatever. Um, AND the other thing is
that we will be able to build up pedigrees
up to millions and millions of people. In fact,
some of them have been already built. Uh, I
don't remember. I think it's, there is some study
with 4 million people, etc. Uh, SO we will
be connected at the, at, at a, at a
level that we would never have dreamed about, uh,
some years ago, a few years ago, thanks to
just computational developments and thanks to the power of
new genetic techniques. So the idea of family and
the idea of genealogy will expand to a next
level where you will be able to find connections
with people in other continents, uh, hundreds of years
ago. Uh, ETC. AND this, of course, you know,
if the genealogy already creates a sense of belonging
or a sense of genealogy, a sense of identity,
just imagine when you will have all this information.
Maybe you and me are connected and for sure
we are connected, but we will discover we are
connected. I don't know, in a specific individual, uh,
20 generations ago in, uh, I don't know, in
Portugal or whenever, uh, this information. Uh, THIS is
not, not, uh, science fiction. This will be available
more and more in the next years and it
will be, uh, really, it will have, of course,
um, uh, uh, results in, in the, in the
perception of, uh, belonging and, and in the collective
perception also of identity.
But when it comes to how we understand our
genetic ancestors, I mean, what is, for example, the
probability that we inherit any genomic fraction from a
specific genealogical ancestor after just a few generations? I
mean, should I Expect for example to have a
genetic fraction of my great great great grandfather or
for example, yes,
yeah, I mean, uh, yeah, I mentioned we have
4 grandparents um and, and then we would expect
25% of our genome coming from each of them,
but, but. But the chromosome, they break at different
places, they don't break and, and, and the chromosomes
are different. Some are very, very large, some are
small. Uh, WHAT happens already is in the, in
the level of, of our grandparents. Uh, WE don't
inherit exactly one quarter of, uh, of our genome
from each of, of, of them. So what happens
already is, uh, instead of that, sometimes we inherited
from one of them 30% of our genome and
from the other one instead of 25%, just 20%,
let's say it begins to fluctuating. And this goes
on and on and on each generation. So if
we go, for instance, 6 generations back, if I
make the numbers correctly, uh, uh, we should have
128 ancestors, genealogical ancestors, but because of this fluctuation,
Already we have some, some of these 128 that
didn't give any single fragment of their genome to
us. Of course it means that some others of
the 128 will give us the double or triple
or whatever of their genome to us. Um, SO
we have to distinguish between our genealogical ancestors, which
are these, that go doubling every generation. By the
way, in just 50 generations, it became like more
people than atoms in the universe or something like
that. So it makes you wonder, of course, because
we are all interconnected and repeated, etc. Many ancestors
are just repeated in our genealogy, uh, but these
are our genealogical ancestors. If we look at, at
our genetic ancestors, they're just a tiny fraction of
the genealogical ones. So again, it becomes what is
more important to, to have one specific ancestor. Like
imagine you have a king or a queen. Uh,
IN the Middle Ages, it was your ancestor. Uh,
AND you are very proud of that. But then
when you analyze the genome of this king or
this queen and your genome, you discover you have
not a single fragment because of this uh fluctuation.
So, uh, you know, what is more important, to
be a genealogical ancestor or to be a genetic
ancestor. By the way, uh, these genealogical ancestors, which
are not your genetic ancestors, they have influenced some
of your genetic ancestors, of course, either. You know,
giving them a specific fragment of their genome that
subsequently get lost and, and didn't reach you or
by influencing them, you know, as a person, um,
shaping their personality and, and their education, etc. So
here's a very interesting discussion. What is more important,
shaping your descendants, let's say, through your intellectual contributions
or just giving a specific fragment of your genome
and sending it to the future, like maybe this
is more important, but it is up to you
to decide, I think.
Mhm. So, uh, let's say that we are studying
history and we study the genetics of, uh, royal
families of elites. Uh, CAN we extrapolate from them
to the genetics of their subjects, uh, to any
extent?
Uh, NO, I don't, but yeah, that's a very
interesting question. Also, some years ago I was involved
in the, in the genetic study of some released,
uh, from the French royal family that were, you
know, executed during the French Revolution. The remains were,
um, destroyed, um, then retrieved, uh, during the restoration.
Nobody knows for sure. But some things like blood,
hairs, uh, etc. ARE floating around claiming to be
from Louis 16 or from Marie Antoinette, etc. Um,
SO I was involved in, in, in, in some
of these studies, uh, and one of the things,
uh, I did is to model the supposed ancestry
of Louis X6. Just looking at their ancestors, uh,
which are known, and I went back several generations,
uh, and, and it was funny because at the
level of, uh, the grandparents, I think, um, of
the 81, grandparents, I think he only had one
French. Of course he has to have a French
because if not he wouldn't, he wouldn't be the
king of France, but the rest were from Austria,
Poland, uh, North Italy, the other. Places because the,
you know, the complex political situation of Europe at
that time where a powerful country was very difficult
to get married with a princess from Spain or
from, uh, Great Britain because it will, uh, you
know, create a conflict for sure. Um, AND, and,
and so that was interesting, uh, the King Louis
XV. Uh, uh, GENETICALLY was not a representative of
the French population. The French population had been, you
know, you know, being French for several hundreds of
years because of the difficulty of the people moving
in that, uh, in that time in any country.
Essentially you were marrying the neighbors for the last
hundreds of years. And another interesting thing in, in,
in another royal family like the Absburg in Spain,
they just married within the family, so they created
a kind of an endogamic monster that ended up
with Charles the 2nd, the bewitched. Uh, WHO was,
uh, accumulating so many, uh, consaninus, um, you know,
ancestors, uh, really crazy. I think 0.5% of, uh,
his genome was in homozygosis with no variation at
all, something unbelievable, uh, and he had, of course,
many ailments and many problems and died without, uh,
without children. So in these two cases, which I
think are very representative, one is the trend towards
endogamy that happens in royal families where you cannot
marry anyone below your level, so you have to
marry within your family, it's kind of crazy, uh,
or for political reasons, you marry someone else, um,
but you really don't represent genetically you, the country,
uh, you are ruling upon. Um, SO if we
could analyze the genomes of all the royal families
in Europe, for instance, in the last hundreds of
years, we'll probably discover they are very similar. Uh,
THEY form a specific population which were very similar
to one each other, like a small cluster, like
if it was a different population from the rest
of the, of Europe.
So, I mean, uh, it's interesting uh because of
course, as we've already mentioned, when, for example, earlier
we talked about sex determination, some of these questions
get very politicized and many times they are very
unfortunately uh misrepresented or the science behind them are
is misrepresented by uh politicians and uh the pop
uh the general population, but, uh, I mean, are
there, for, for example, because Particularly now, uh, people,
uh, uh, um, there, there are some narratives going
around in regards to immigration and people from, uh,
for example, outside of Europe, immigrating here. Um, I
mean, does the idea of a pure populations make
any sense at all, and does it make sense
for people to worry from a I mean, if
we're talking about the science here, of course to
worry that their race, their identity might get, uh,
I mean, tarnished or might get contaminated by breeding
with people from other, from other places, people from
Africa, from the Middle East, and so on.
Yeah, I mean there are, there is this political
narrative all around I would say in those times.
Uh, IT doesn't make sense to me, uh, the
idea of races, I think it's scientifically not supported.
In fact, one of the things we have learned
in the last 15 years of ancient DNA studies
is there are several layers of ancestry which are
over. Imposed, uh, and there are these, this, this
ancestry, these ancestry layers that maybe are slightly different
from one population to to another, but it's very
difficult to argue that there is any single population
with a single ancestry when there are all these
layers everywhere, um, so this, this is one question,
but of course when we think on distant uh
immigrants or whatever. There is also the temptation of,
uh, of a kind of uh Making genetics, uh,
into politics, um, and I would say this is
unavoidable, but at the same time, uh, there is
a lot of, you know, genetic information that needs
to be explained, uh, correctly. The one thing is
that you can explain it correctly and then the
politicians can also ignore it, uh, but, uh, at
least we have to make the effort to, um,
to explain things correctly. Um, BECAUSE among other things,
one of the messages also we have uncovered from
all these years of paleogenomic, uh, investigation in, in
humans is that, is that migrations have been prevalent.
In the last thousands of years with lots of
layers, replacements and and situations, of course, some of
them associated to nasty things like social inequality, but
the social inequality is also prevalent today in our
societies. So I think there are many things to
be learned from the past. That could help us
to understand a bit the present also, but the
temptation of misunderstanding is always present, not only in,
in sound genetic studies, but also in what I
mentioned of these ancestry companies. These ancestry companies, they
can have a A huge social impact. So it's
not something that you can say, well, you know,
it's a private business and it's, you know, nothing
happens if they misrepresent their results, the, you know,
the, the social consequences are for us anyway. So
yeah, we are, we, we. We are in an
interesting times where all this information, which is very
powerful and can be very positive in many ways
if properly explained, uh, they can also have negative
consequences.
Yeah, yeah, but I think it's uh either way
it's important for scientists particularly, I mean, for the
experts themselves to clarify that, uh, I mean, even
if people don't listen to them because of the
particular political economic context they're living in and so
on, uh, I mean, it's important to clarify that
uh ideas that are promoted, for example, by the
far right, the conservative right, related. That, uh, promote
racist ideas, xenophobic ideas, uh, ideas related to, um,
I, I mean, as I was saying, race and
or a pure identity or a pure population, whatever
that might mean, and then also sometimes they might
promote forms of eugenics that uh none of that
is supported by science,
correct. Yeah, yeah, sure, I mean, uh, science, you
know, it has the obligation of explaining themselves the
result, uh, the, to the, to the public, the
results, but, uh, the public, you know, the society
has the obligation of trying to understand the genetic
results and, you know, and therefore well things like
that we are trying to do. To do here
is uh is a bit like that. It's not
just a responsibility of the scientists at the end,
but also the the society of being more informed
on how these results can be interpreted and they
need to be digested. So, uh, there is a,
you know, a mixed responsibility on this, otherwise it
will never be completely fair, let's say.
Mhm. Uh, BUT uh, I mean, what are perhaps
the positive ways or the positive messages that we
can get from, uh, human population genetics and from
studying, uh, genetic diversity, genetic variation, but also, of
course, genetic similarity. I mean, what are some of
the positive things or positive messages that we can,
uh, derive from that?
Yeah, there, there are many positive, uh, messages. The,
the first one I mentioned already is the, the
fact that there are no isolated or pure populations
in any sense you can imagine from a genetic
point of view. Uh, SO there are no mutations
that are present in all individuals on any population
you might, you might describe from a social, cultural,
or even geographical point of view. Uh, WHAT, what
we have is that these shared ancestry levels, layers,
uh, in slightly different proportions depending on the situation
in the world or in the continent or whenever,
but this means there is no point in talking
about populations are isolated items. Uh, BUT also this
sense of interconnectivity of belonging. Uh, I mentioned, if
we go back several tens of generations, we'll have
more ancestors than people have ever lived in the
world. How, you know, could this be? Uh, IT'S
just because we are all very tightly interconnected. We
share hundreds and hundreds of ancestors, any of us,
including people from a very distant place, uh, you
know, in Australia. Um, AND another thing is that
very soon we'll be able to find these ancestors,
uh, you know, scattered all around. We'll be able
to distinguish these fragments of chromosomes which are identical
because descendants. Um, YOU have to imagine that you
are, you know, I don't know, 1000 years ago,
your genome is scattered in many different sites, archaeological
sites where people are buried there, and these are
real ancestors, um, well beyond any genealogical record you
can even dream of. Uh, YOUR genome will be
scattered in 1 million fragments, but all, any of
these individuals, some of them are going to be
found. Uh, THEY will be your genetic ancestors, your
real genetic ancestors. Some of them bringing you a
small fragment of the chromosomes, you know, 20. At
the same time, you can think on the future
in the same way. Uh, EVEN if you don't
have kids yourself, someone, a cousin, uh, you know,
a grandfather, your brother, whenever we have kids, and
Your genome in the future, 1000 years in the,
in the future will be scattered all across the
globe. Uh, SO this interconnection is a fantastic image.
It's difficult to visualize, but it, it creates, it's
real. It's not just a metaphor. Its real because
it could be investigated. It could be sequenced. Your
genome could be sequenced in the future and find
these millions of fragments scattered all across the planet
in many different populations and many different people. So
I think it's a very. Uh, IT'S a very
positive message if we, if you think on that.
Not only that, if you go back to the
Neanderthals, for instance, we already know we have about
2% or 2.5% of their genes in our genomes,
you know, especially outside Africa, in, in, in populations
like Eurasia, Asia, and the Americas, uh, and these
people, they are extinct, but in many ways, His,
uh, genes are still around us, connecting ourselves with
people who separated from our lineage more than, you
know, half a million years ago. I think it
is a fantastic image, uh, for, uh, considering ourselves
as members of a single large and extended family.
No, yeah, that, that image of interconnectedness is really
very uh positive and, uh, uh, I mean it,
and, and it has a sci a proper scientific
basis, so it's, it's very important to, for people
to know that. So, uh, I have one last
question then. uh, I mean, as new The technological
developments in genetics occur as, I, I mean, as
we develop new techniques, acquire more knowledge. Do you
think that in the future, there could be new
concepts, new categories of genetic identity?
Yeah, I think so. I think, Jeanette, uh, you
know, identity is becoming an important concept in, in
the 21st century. At some point we thought we
are going to the globalization and history will be
lost and we will be all happy. Uh, AND
in the last 5 years we have been a
have seen a contraction of this globalization. We are
now emerging in the Second Cold War, maybe in
regional areas like, uh, you know, America, North America,
maybe Europe, maybe China, etc. Uh, IN this context
of conflict between all these regions, I think identity
is emerging again. Um, IF, if, if it has
disappeared, I'm not sure if it disappeared in the
last decades of the 20th century, but it is
emerging clearly as a signal, uh, of perception and,
and belonging, uh, and therefore genetics is emerging as
a tool for identity, as I mentioned before, well
beyond any other tools that we can imagine like
genealogy, for instance. And therefore this tool needs to
be used in a proper way. It needs to
be used as a positive tool. It can be
used all the other way, you know, as a
very conflicting and negative tool, but at the same
time it has the possibility of being used for
good. Uh, AND I think, uh, we'll see many
new developments of identity, many interconnections of identity with
genetics, which is a very powerful scientific tool, uh,
and therefore I just, I wanted to explain in
my book, uh, these, all these possibilities always in
the positive sense because, uh, you know, the negativity
will, will come out eventually from other places.
Right. OK, so the book is again Identity, what
DNA can tell us about Ourselves, and I will
be leaving a link to it in the description
of the interview. Uh, Doctor Loweza Fox, just before
we go, uh, apart from the book, uh, are
there any places on the internet where people can
find you or your work?
Um, NO, I think I express myself better in,
uh, in books than in public speaking. No, no,
I don't know. Uh, AT least in books, you
can really, um, explain yourself and, you know, in
a thoughtful way, uh, in a moment where, you
know, we see the president of the world speaking
immediately. Constantly in, in social media without thinking. So
at least let's, let's hope we can think a
bit about, uh, you know, about these complex subjects
and, uh, you know, writing and thinking is the
best way of, uh, of going through.
Yeah, I, I, I agree. So thank you so
much for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a real pleasure to talk with
you again.
No, thanks to you. Goodbye, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, John Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.